Okay, back up just a little bit and let's just change directions. All right.
There must be a bit of the actor. I've already said this before. There must be a
bit of the actress in order to do the things on stage that she does. Of course.
But actually, I think there's a bit of actress or actor in almost everyone who's
into the fandom scene at all, and even people who aren't. It's just a matter of
whether we can actually do something with it or not. A lot of people just
assume, well, that'll never happen, I'll never get to do anything with it, and
they forget about that part of their personality. I'm a little more stubborn. I
intend to do it professionally eventually, and to some extent am doing that now
with my performing as a singer and dancer with the singing telegram companies
and as a model and so forth. And I've been in two science fiction movies as an
extra, Logan's Run and Lathe of Heaven, which both were a lot of fun. But it
doesn't take an actor or an actress to do these kind of things, and I've seen a
lot of really wonderful skits and costumes and performances pulled off by people
who had never even considered the idea of being professional actors or
actresses. They just want to make it real. And that's all acting ever was, was
just trying to make something real and recreate something. It's just that what
we do is a little different than your typical stage play. But it should be no
less entertaining, and we're trying to create it so that it's no less
entertaining.
When you got into this, were there any resources that you drew upon in order to
learn how to do what you're doing now? I still don't know what I'm doing now.
I've learned a lot from other people, and from lots of trial and error, mostly
trial and error. I discovered fabric glue when I was in desperation, and it
works wonderfully on all kinds of things. When I started costuming, I really
didn't know anything about sewing at all. The idea of making clothes was the
farthest thing from my mind, and it just happened that I needed a costume, and I
had to figure out how to create this thing that you couldn't possibly buy in a
store by its very nature. And the first costumes were very much trial and error.
But since then, I've learned a lot of shortcuts, shortcuts that an average
seamstress would probably never use because they learned all the rules and I
didn't. And I try to pass on those shortcuts. And at a lot of the major
conventions, they have workshops where they discuss costuming and shortcuts that
other people find and stage techniques. and there are books and magazines out
that cover costuming and makeup and easy ways to do all these things. And
eventually I did break down and take a class in costuming at my university
because as a drama major I had to, but by that time I pretty well had figured
most of it out for myself. But there are some wonderful books you can get at the
local library which can tell you how to do almost anything you want to do. This
must be kind of infectious because you said you had a group that did this, and
you've had people that help you. So you kind of get together with other people,
and they think this is nice, and so you've got another convert to the… Oh, yes.
We don't have anyone who's ever met or joined our group that hasn't immediately
ended up in a costume. Sometimes under protest the first time, but they always
end up under a costume, and then they always want more and more costumes, and
the next thing you know, we've got a whole new set of costumers. When we went to
Boston, we took five people in four different costume skits. These five people,
I was the only one who had ever been to a WorldCon before. Most of them had
never even been to a major convention before. All they knew was they wanted to
do the masquerade. They loved science fiction, fantasy, and fandom, and they
wanted to do the masquerade. And they had a lot of creativity, and they were
willing to listen to suggestions, and we all worked together and we came away
with four awards. People who nobody had ever heard of before. We went up there
to the Worldcon and won four of the top awards. Best Presentation Overall, First
Runner-Up for Best Presentation, Star Wars Special Award Prize, and First Runner
-Up for Best Fantasy. And immediately everyone wanted to know about Texas. They
had never realized there were so many costumers in Texas. And these were all
basically newbies and none of the costumes were extremely complex, but the ideas
around the costumes were good and good enough to catch the imagination of the
audience, and that's where it's at is the idea. If you've got an idea, it
doesn't matter if you're a virtuoso at the seamstress stuff as long as the idea
is something that will catch and hold an audience. You used the term newies?
Newbies. Newbies? Newbies. She's been using a few fan vocabulary. Yeah, that's
why. Somebody needs to make a fan vocabulary dictionary. There is one, I'm sure.
I've seen one anyway. Yeah. Let's talk a bit about fandom.
We're going to have to give a blitz. You have spoken to it on a couple of...
I'll just stop the tape.
Okay. There are actually several different level of fans. There are new fan,
which are people who just discovered that, oh, you mean there's somebody else
that reads this stuff besides me? There are true fan who are the people who go
to conventions on a live-and-die situation and fandom is a way of life and will
sell whatever they can sell at the dealers' tables if they can make enough money
to get back and forth between the conventions and who literally the convention
society is their social life. Then there are a whole scope of people in between.
They're what we call closet fans who are the people who read the books, who
watch the shows, who go to the movies, but who have absolutely no idea that
there's any kind of organization out there whatsoever. There are the slightly
organized fans which are people who realize that there is organization, who
maybe go to a con every now and then, who very now and then get a chance to meet
their favorite author but who really aren't that much into the convention scene,
it's just something that they like and every now and then they like to express
the fact that they enjoy it. And then of course there are the professional fan
which are people who through their professions one way or the other have somehow
gotten tied up with the science fiction or fantasy genre, and because they deal
with it every day or part of every day and because they must like it or they
wouldn't deal with it to some extent, they're fan too. A lot of the writers who
write the stuff are actually fans who, although they're professionals and write
the things, they like it. And if you like something, then you're a fan of it by
the strictest definition. And it just depends on the level of that definition.
And then, of course, there's always the sub-genre that we try to ignore, which
is your space cadets. And we call them space cadets because these are the kiddie
-type mentalities. Fortunately, most of them are children. Unfortunately, some
of them aren't. who think fans are just a way to play shoot-em-up Buck Rogers
with other people and have missed the point of what fandom is about. But they're
a part of fandom too, and you can't exclude them. And there are many other
levels of fandom that have no name. A person who just likes maybe one story or
one aspect of fandom, but they like that very much, and they maybe illustrate it
or try to copy it or something like that, they're a fan, even though they may
not realize it.
a good explanation of fandom. Yeah, that's another show to itself. You just did
a whole show? Fan is the plural of fan. Right, fan is the plural of fan. Well,
we might as well ask about filking then. Oh, damn, are we going to talk about
filk singing? I'm curious, yeah, tell us about filk singing, the fact that it
exists and what is it? Well, basically, like any other, When you take fandom as
a microcosm of people and that this is their social life when they're at a
convention, you have to deal with the fact that social life includes
entertainment. If you're into science fiction and fantasy and you're doing
something special like a convention, you don't want to go out and entertain
yourself by going to the local bar or the local disco. That's boring. You want
to do something that's uniquely fandom. Something that was developed through
fandom is a thing called filk singing. Filk singing is folk singing sort of.
Basically, filk singing is a creation of songs that are performed by one person
or many person on or off key. It makes no difference. That were written
specifically for the audience of science fiction and fantasy listeners. And
there are a lot of sing-along songs. Some of them are very silly and very
stupid, but some of them are very serious and very beautiful. And it's a form of
entertainment strictly for science fiction and fantasy audiences. You know, you
would never find them on the top ten unless all of a sudden a national fad
happened to turn that direction. But a very viable art form. Now, some of filk
singing is very simple. It simply involves taking a tune from a normal song and
changing the words around to have something to do with science fiction or
fantasy. and usually those are funny and they're the kind that you can get a lot
of giggles off and everyone joins in. But the more serious element is original
songs that deal with very serious ideas like the fact that man's finally
reaching for space and the Columbia is here or the fact that when are we really
going to get to be dancing on the moon by the time it actually happens, I'll be
too old, and things like that. And filking is a whole type of folk singing.
strictly for fans. And some fans don't like it because they don't like the
taking of other people's music and putting other lyrics to it. But for most
fans, it's a wonderful outlet for getting to know other people and just sit
around at night when there's nothing else to do and sing songs and get a very
close type of camaraderie that you only get in some other kind of very close
-knit group. Not all conventions have filk singing, but the more intimate ones
where it it really is a social life type situation too because it's a very big
part of the social life. Partying is a very big part of the social life too and
that usually starts before and after the folk singing and is a whole separate
thing altogether. But partying is a part of everybody's social life no matter
what they do. Do you want to get back on the track now? No, no, those are really
good. We're trying to do some more stuff on fandom because it is a big part of
it and fandom because you were in it. Remember what it was like before fandom?
Oh yes. There was such a thing? Oh yes. Well, 95 or greater percent of the
population lives in that particular area. Exactly. You know, science fiction
fandom is different than being a football fan. Oh much. Oh much. So that these
shows will probably be pretty interesting. There's a there seems to be a bit of
animosity. I don't know from okay from the Trekkies versus the science fiction
fans. I've seen it at science fiction conventions where Trekkie is synonymous
with Space Cadet. Well, actually, you have to understand the history of that and
I explain most of it. Basically, what happened is in the beginning, before there
was Star Trek, which Star Trek is not just a history of media thing, you know, a
major phenomenon in media, but it's also a main timeline, drawing line, in the
history of science fiction and fantasy fandom. And before Trek, there was still
fandom, but it was almost exclusively literary fandom, strictly oriented towards
the writers and the things they wrote, and very small groupings, you know,
conventions had maybe 200 people, where nowadays it's not unusual to go to one
with 8,000. It was a very small informal group of writers and the people who
liked what they wrote who were their fans. Then Star Trek came along and all of
a sudden a whole world of people who'd never occurred to them that such a thing
as science fiction existed were exposed to it and they were exposed to it in
such a way where they discovered that they liked it because it was people caring
about people and it was exploring problems and situations that you can't explore
in average, everyday mundane life. You know, like, for example, to quote one of
the episodes, in one of the episodes, a man is brought face to face with his
evil half, and you have his good half and his evil half, and he's forced to cope
with the idea that they're both him. And it's done in a very graphic way that
you could never do in a non-science fiction story. And so this caught a lot of
people's imagination and a huge following. grew up around the show. And then
they discovered conventions. They started out by making their own Star Trek
convention, which was nothing but Star Trek and had none of the regular science
fiction or fantasy with it. And then they started sort of moving in on the
regular conventions, where they'd start showing up because they would discover
that science fiction was there, too, and they weren't just in love with Trek. It
was just their first love. And they discovered science fiction through i'm one
of these i had read it before but i didn't really discover science fiction
instilled until star trek but i do not feel at this point that that makes me a
trekkie and i'll explain that in a minute but they started moving in on the
other types of fandom and the base roots grassroots of fandom looked at this
influx of video junkies and said my god these are the trekkies you know and they
treated them like a base level set because to them they were because they didn't
start with the original literature, they started from the hand-fed media of
television. Now since then that has died down for the most part because most
Star Trek fans have just used that as a jumping board into the literary levels
of science fiction and fantasy. And while they're still Star Trek fans, they
still are very much in love with all the other areas as well and therefore are
not Trekkies and are not just going to die for Mr. Spock's ears or something.
But we still have a large influx of the people who haven't discovered the
literary branch of the genre and only know the media branch, and it's still
unfortunately largely looked down on by the people who are mostly into the
literary branch. But it is changing every day because Star Trek is, after all,
11 years old, and most of the people who were Trekkies have long ago changed
where their influence is. And so, for the most part, that kind of brouhaha is
gone, except by the diehard fans who still feel that if there's more than 200
people and if you're not strictly there for the literature, then you're not a
true fan.
15 years old. 16. 16 years old. Wasn't it fall of 66? 66, yeah. Yeah. 16 years
old. We're getting old, man. And I didn't discover it until the first reruns. I
was unfortunately a senior in high school when it started. Yeah, I was too.
Or somewhere I think. Let's see. We've covered costuming and we've covered
Masquerade and we've covered different kinds of costuming at cons.
Covered fandom, ilk singing. What else? Parties. Does anything occur to you that
might not be obvious?
Yeah, I got one. Let's go back to costume a little bit. Whenever you're putting
a costume together, some
of the accoutrements that you're wearing are not your standard Fred's Clothing
Store items. Where do you go about finding those? anywhere I can I love thrift
stores thrift stores are wonderful people turn junk into the thrift store that
is some of the most beautiful brocades something that will pass for a celtic
pendant that somebody's great-great grandmother wore and it's not in style so
they throw it out and it's wonderful on a costume as a matter of fact I started
my jewelry collecting by going to thrift stores and started a lot of as a matter
of fact a lot of the costumes that I still use were gotten by going to a thrift
store, discovering somebody had made a dress and thrown it away because it
wasn't in style, but it happened to be absolutely perfect for the year 1100. And
so I would buy it for 50 cents and put some trim on it and redo it so it was
exactly right, take the zipper out and put lace in or ties to tie it up the back
so it was proper. And I had a costume for 50 cents plus the cost of the trim.
And there are places where you can get costume material a lot of stores uh
costume stores have things you can use but for the most part it's just thrift
stores flea markets um if you're into a particular era for example uh there's a
lot of medievalists who are very much into the medieval era for their fantasy
costumes uh you can get medieval jewelry shipped in from scotland and england as
a matter of fact when i have a dealer's table i sell jewelry that is imported
from scotland and england that is recreations of the actual old jewelry and the
only place it would be popular is at conventions and medieval events but here
because the people can't find it i'm doing them a service by supplying it and
there are other people who do the same sort of thing um fabric outlets are
wonderful when you are looking for a particular look of fabric uh there are
certain kinds of specialty stores that have certain special kinds of fabric
designed just for costuming that are wonderful places to haunt and just about
every metropolitan area has one. You just have to really search to find where it
is. Garage sales are wonderful, because the average non-fan mundane person, when
they have something that's maybe strictly oriented towards costume, is not
necessarily going to want to keep it around, because they don't have anything
they can do with it. And so you can get some really nice costume pieces for 50
cents, a dollar, maybe two dollars. Johnny had to have a King Arthur outfit for
the last play, and it's all done and they don't want it anymore so it's out on
the rack for sale and things like that but a large part of it you have to create
and there are all kinds of shortcuts for creating it i can make and have made on
occasion i've made armor for masquerade type costumes out of cardboard and
wrapping paper foil and on the stage you cannot tell that it is not really gold
armor or silver armor or whatever uh wood putty if there's something that you
want that you can't make, like the Boris paintings that are so well known, a lot
of his characters wear jewelry that is impossible to really get created out of
metal, but it looks wonderful. So you can make it out of wood putty and spray
paint it or cover it with foil and it looks just like metal jewelry. There's a
lot of shortcuts you can take. And it's a lot of fun because you can just open
up your imagination and let it run wild as far as, well, let's see, this is a
look I want. What can I use it to make it out of? Oh, well let's try paper
mache! Gee, that works, or wood putty, again, like I said, all kinds of glues
and resins, and of course, you can go and use the things that they actually use
in the studios, and use things like latex and plaster, but it takes a bit of
training to learn how to use those, although those are the most effective ways
of making things that you can't buy. Of course there are those of us who go
around and make things for people who can't make them themselves like if Johnny
wants a cloak and he has no idea how to make one he can buy one from a person
such as me who goes around making them simply because there is no place you can
walk into the store and buy one. You mean there are no cloak stores in Dallas?
Yes, Neiman Marcus, $5,000.
That's about it. That's about it.